docs/README.md, before:

# DuckDB Extension Template
This repository contains a template for creating a DuckDB extension. The main goal of this template is to allow users to easily develop, test and distribute their own DuckDB extension. The main branch of the template is always based on the latest stable DuckDB allowing you to try out your extension right away.

## Getting started
First step to getting started is to create your own repo from this template by clicking `Use this template`. Then clone your new repository using 
```sh
git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/<you>/<your-new-extension-repo>.git
```
Note that `--recurse-submodules` will ensure DuckDB is pulled which is required to build the extension.

## Building
### Managing dependencies
DuckDB extensions uses VCPKG for dependency management. Enabling VCPKG is very simple: follow the [installation instructions](https://vcpkg.io/en/getting-started) or just run the following:
```shell
cd <your-working-dir-not-the-plugin-repo>
git clone https://github.com/Microsoft/vcpkg.git
sh ./vcpkg/scripts/bootstrap.sh -disableMetrics
export VCPKG_TOOLCHAIN_PATH=`pwd`/vcpkg/scripts/buildsystems/vcpkg.cmake
```
Note: VCPKG is only required for extensions that want to rely on it for dependency management. If you want to develop an extension without dependencies, or want to do your own dependency management, just skip this step. Note that the example extension uses VCPKG to build with a dependency for instructive purposes, so when skipping this step the build may not work without removing the dependency.

### Build steps
Now to build the extension, run:
```sh
make
```
The main binaries that will be built are:
```sh
./build/release/duckdb
./build/release/test/unittest
./build/release/extension/<extension_name>/<extension_name>.duckdb_extension
```
- `duckdb` is the binary for the duckdb shell with the extension code automatically loaded. 
- `unittest` is the test runner of duckdb. Again, the extension is already linked into the binary.
- `<extension_name>.duckdb_extension` is the loadable binary as it would be distributed.

## Running the extension
To run the extension code, simply start the shell with `./build/release/duckdb`. This shell will have the extension pre-loaded.  

Now we can use the features from the extension directly in DuckDB. The template contains a single scalar function `quack()` that takes a string arguments and returns a string:
```
D select quack('Jane') as result;
┌───────────────┐
│    result     │
│    varchar    │
├───────────────┤
│ Quack Jane 🐥 │
└───────────────┘
```

## Running the tests
Different tests can be created for DuckDB extensions. The primary way of testing DuckDB extensions should be the SQL tests in `./test/sql`. These SQL tests can be run using:
```sh
make test
```

## Getting started with your own extension
After creating a repository from this template, the first step is to name your extension. To rename the extension, run:
```
python3 ./scripts/bootstrap-template.py <extension_name_you_want>
```
Feel free to delete the script after this step.

Now you're good to go! After a (re)build, you should now be able to use your duckdb extension:
```
./build/release/duckdb
D select <extension_name_you_chose>('Jane') as result;
┌─────────────────────────────────────┐
│                result               │
│               varchar               │
├─────────────────────────────────────┤
│ <extension_name_you_chose> Jane 🐥  │
└─────────────────────────────────────┘
```

For inspiration/examples on how to extend DuckDB in a more meaningful way, check out the [test extensions](https://github.com/duckdb/duckdb/blob/main/test/extension),
the [in-tree extensions](https://github.com/duckdb/duckdb/tree/main/extension), and the [out-of-tree extensions](https://github.com/duckdblabs).

## Distributing your extension
Easy distribution of extensions built with this template is facilitated using a similar process used by DuckDB itself. 
Binaries are generated for various versions/platforms allowing duckdb to automatically install the correct binary.

This step requires that you pass the following 4 parameters to your GitHub repo as action secrets:

| secret name   | description                         |
| ------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| S3_REGION     | s3 region holding your bucket       |
| S3_BUCKET     | the name of the bucket to deploy to |
| S3_DEPLOY_ID  | the S3 key id                       |
| S3_DEPLOY_KEY | the S3 key secret                   |

After setting these variables, all pushes to main will trigger a new (dev) release. Note that your AWS token should
have full permissions to the bucket, and you will need to have ACLs enabled.

### Installing the deployed binaries
To install your extension binaries from S3, you will need to do two things. Firstly, DuckDB should be launched with the 
`allow_unsigned_extensions` option set to true. How to set this will depend on the client you're using. Some examples:

CLI:
```shell
duckdb -unsigned
```

Secondly, you will need to set the repository endpoint in DuckDB to the HTTP url of your bucket + version of the extension 
you want to install. To do this run the following SQL query in DuckDB:
```sql
SET custom_extension_repository='bucket.s3.eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/<your_extension_name>/latest';
```
Note that the `/latest` path will allow you to install the latest extension version available for your current version of 
DuckDB. To specify a specific version, you can pass the version instead.

After running these steps, you can install and load your extension using the regular INSTALL/LOAD commands in DuckDB:
```sql
INSTALL <your_extension_name>
LOAD <your_extension_name>
```

### Versioning of your extension
Extension binaries will only work for the specific DuckDB version they were built for. The version of DuckDB that is targeted 
is set to the latest stable release for the main branch of the template so initially that is all you need. As new releases 
of DuckDB are published however, the extension repository will need to be updated. The template comes with a workflow set-up
that will automatically build the binaries for all DuckDB target architectures that are available in the corresponding DuckDB
version. This workflow is found in `.github/workflows/MainDistributionPipeline.yml`. It is up to the extension developer to keep
this up to date with DuckDB. Note also that its possible to distribute binaries for multiple DuckDB versions in this workflow 
by simply duplicating the jobs.

## Setting up CLion 

### Opening project
Configuring CLion with the extension template requires a little work. Firstly, make sure that the DuckDB submodule is available. 
Then make sure to open `./duckdb/CMakeLists.txt` (so not the top level `CMakeLists.txt` file from this repo) as a project in CLion.
Now to fix your project path go to `tools->CMake->Change Project Root`([docs](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/clion/change-project-root-directory.html)) to set the project root to the root dir of this repo.

### Debugging
To set up debugging in CLion, there are two simple steps required. Firstly, in `CLion -> Settings / Preferences -> Build, Execution, Deploy -> CMake` you will need to add the desired builds (e.g. Debug, Release, RelDebug, etc). There's different ways to configure this, but the easiest is to leave all empty, except the `build path`, which needs to be set to `../build/{build type}`. Now on a clean repository you will first need to run `make {build type}` to initialize the CMake build directory. After running make, you will be able to (re)build from CLion by using the build target we just created. If you use the CLion editor, you can create a CLion CMake profiles matching the CMake variables that are described in the makefile, and then you don't need to invoke the Makefile.

The second step is to configure the unittest runner as a run/debug configuration. To do this, go to `Run -> Edit Configurations` and click `+ -> Cmake Application`. The target and executable should be `unittest`. This will run all the DuckDB tests. To specify only running the extension specific tests, add `--test-dir ../../.. [sql]` to the `Program Arguments`. Note that it is recommended to use the `unittest` executable for testing/development within CLion. The actual DuckDB CLI currently does not reliably work as a run target in CLion.

Commit message:

Update README.md for macOS pkg-config

docs/README.md, after:

# DuckDB Extension Template
This repository contains a template for creating a DuckDB extension. The main goal of this template is to allow users to easily develop, test and distribute their own DuckDB extension. The main branch of the template is always based on the latest stable DuckDB allowing you to try out your extension right away.

## Getting started
First step to getting started is to create your own repo from this template by clicking `Use this template`. Then clone your new repository using 
```sh
git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/<you>/<your-new-extension-repo>.git
```
Note that `--recurse-submodules` will ensure DuckDB is pulled which is required to build the extension.

## Building
### Managing dependencies
DuckDB extensions uses VCPKG for dependency management. Enabling VCPKG is very simple: follow the [installation instructions](https://vcpkg.io/en/getting-started) or just run the following:
```shell
cd <your-working-dir-not-the-plugin-repo>
git clone https://github.com/Microsoft/vcpkg.git
sh ./vcpkg/scripts/bootstrap.sh -disableMetrics
export VCPKG_TOOLCHAIN_PATH=`pwd`/vcpkg/scripts/buildsystems/vcpkg.cmake
```
If building on macOS, ensure that pkg-config is installed.
```shell
brew install pkg-config
```
Note: VCPKG is only required for extensions that want to rely on it for dependency management. If you want to develop an extension without dependencies, or want to do your own dependency management, just skip this step. Note that the example extension uses VCPKG to build with a dependency for instructive purposes, so when skipping this step the build may not work without removing the dependency.

### Build steps
Now to build the extension, run:
```sh
make
```
The main binaries that will be built are:
```sh
./build/release/duckdb
./build/release/test/unittest
./build/release/extension/<extension_name>/<extension_name>.duckdb_extension
```
- `duckdb` is the binary for the duckdb shell with the extension code automatically loaded. 
- `unittest` is the test runner of duckdb. Again, the extension is already linked into the binary.
- `<extension_name>.duckdb_extension` is the loadable binary as it would be distributed.

## Running the extension
To run the extension code, simply start the shell with `./build/release/duckdb`. This shell will have the extension pre-loaded.  

Now we can use the features from the extension directly in DuckDB. The template contains a single scalar function `quack()` that takes a string arguments and returns a string:
```
D select quack('Jane') as result;
┌───────────────┐
│    result     │
│    varchar    │
├───────────────┤
│ Quack Jane 🐥 │
└───────────────┘
```

## Running the tests
Different tests can be created for DuckDB extensions. The primary way of testing DuckDB extensions should be the SQL tests in `./test/sql`. These SQL tests can be run using:
```sh
make test
```

## Getting started with your own extension
After creating a repository from this template, the first step is to name your extension. To rename the extension, run:
```
python3 ./scripts/bootstrap-template.py <extension_name_you_want>
```
Feel free to delete the script after this step.

Now you're good to go! After a (re)build, you should now be able to use your duckdb extension:
```
./build/release/duckdb
D select <extension_name_you_chose>('Jane') as result;
┌─────────────────────────────────────┐
│                result               │
│               varchar               │
├─────────────────────────────────────┤
│ <extension_name_you_chose> Jane 🐥  │
└─────────────────────────────────────┘
```

For inspiration/examples on how to extend DuckDB in a more meaningful way, check out the [test extensions](https://github.com/duckdb/duckdb/blob/main/test/extension),
the [in-tree extensions](https://github.com/duckdb/duckdb/tree/main/extension), and the [out-of-tree extensions](https://github.com/duckdblabs).

## Distributing your extension
Easy distribution of extensions built with this template is facilitated using a similar process used by DuckDB itself. 
Binaries are generated for various versions/platforms allowing duckdb to automatically install the correct binary.

This step requires that you pass the following 4 parameters to your GitHub repo as action secrets:

| secret name   | description                         |
| ------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| S3_REGION     | s3 region holding your bucket       |
| S3_BUCKET     | the name of the bucket to deploy to |
| S3_DEPLOY_ID  | the S3 key id                       |
| S3_DEPLOY_KEY | the S3 key secret                   |

After setting these variables, all pushes to main will trigger a new (dev) release. Note that your AWS token should
have full permissions to the bucket, and you will need to have ACLs enabled.

### Installing the deployed binaries
To install your extension binaries from S3, you will need to do two things. Firstly, DuckDB should be launched with the 
`allow_unsigned_extensions` option set to true. How to set this will depend on the client you're using. Some examples:

CLI:
```shell
duckdb -unsigned
```

Secondly, you will need to set the repository endpoint in DuckDB to the HTTP url of your bucket + version of the extension 
you want to install. To do this run the following SQL query in DuckDB:
```sql
SET custom_extension_repository='bucket.s3.eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/<your_extension_name>/latest';
```
Note that the `/latest` path will allow you to install the latest extension version available for your current version of 
DuckDB. To specify a specific version, you can pass the version instead.

After running these steps, you can install and load your extension using the regular INSTALL/LOAD commands in DuckDB:
```sql
INSTALL <your_extension_name>
LOAD <your_extension_name>
```

### Versioning of your extension
Extension binaries will only work for the specific DuckDB version they were built for. The version of DuckDB that is targeted 
is set to the latest stable release for the main branch of the template so initially that is all you need. As new releases 
of DuckDB are published however, the extension repository will need to be updated. The template comes with a workflow set-up
that will automatically build the binaries for all DuckDB target architectures that are available in the corresponding DuckDB
version. This workflow is found in `.github/workflows/MainDistributionPipeline.yml`. It is up to the extension developer to keep
this up to date with DuckDB. Note also that its possible to distribute binaries for multiple DuckDB versions in this workflow 
by simply duplicating the jobs.

## Setting up CLion 

### Opening project
Configuring CLion with the extension template requires a little work. Firstly, make sure that the DuckDB submodule is available. 
Then make sure to open `./duckdb/CMakeLists.txt` (so not the top level `CMakeLists.txt` file from this repo) as a project in CLion.
Now to fix your project path go to `tools->CMake->Change Project Root`([docs](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/clion/change-project-root-directory.html)) to set the project root to the root dir of this repo.

### Debugging
To set up debugging in CLion, there are two simple steps required. Firstly, in `CLion -> Settings / Preferences -> Build, Execution, Deploy -> CMake` you will need to add the desired builds (e.g. Debug, Release, RelDebug, etc). There's different ways to configure this, but the easiest is to leave all empty, except the `build path`, which needs to be set to `../build/{build type}`. Now on a clean repository you will first need to run `make {build type}` to initialize the CMake build directory. After running make, you will be able to (re)build from CLion by using the build target we just created. If you use the CLion editor, you can create a CLion CMake profiles matching the CMake variables that are described in the makefile, and then you don't need to invoke the Makefile.

The second step is to configure the unittest runner as a run/debug configuration. To do this, go to `Run -> Edit Configurations` and click `+ -> Cmake Application`. The target and executable should be `unittest`. This will run all the DuckDB tests. To specify only running the extension specific tests, add `--test-dir ../../.. [sql]` to the `Program Arguments`. Note that it is recommended to use the `unittest` executable for testing/development within CLion. The actual DuckDB CLI currently does not reliably work as a run target in CLion.
